---
layout: post
title:      "Module 2 Project"
date:       2021-02-06 13:38:30 +0000
permalink:  module_2_project
---


I've spent the past few weeks working on completing the project for Module 2. The purpose of this project was to clean, organize, and analyze a datset about houses with a multivariate linear regression in order to predict the sale prices of homes with certain attributes. My intended audience is potential homeowners/sellers. My intention with completing this project is that those looking to buy or sell a home can see which features will impact the price the most and how they can utilize this information to either buy the home of their dreams or sell their house at the price it deserves. The process for completing this project involved data preparation, data exploration, and data modeling.

I started with preparing the data by cleaning the original dataset, removing any erroneous columns/data points, and saving it as a new data frame. During data exploration, I continued to clean and organize the data, checking for linearity and multicollinearity as well as organizing features by categorical and continuous data. Throughout my exploratory data analysis, I sought to answer these questions:
1. What features have the highest correlation with price?
2. Does grade vary by location?
3. Is the number of bathrooms or number of bedrooms more important?

It was determined that grade (house rating), latitude, and bathrooms have the highest correlation with price. Using just these features to make a quick model, it appears as though they can explain approximately 54% of our price data. Mapping out the grade variations by location (using longitude and latitude) was helpful in visualizing the spread of houses but there was no discernible pattern to the spread; there were mainly clusters of similarly graded houses surrounded by clusters of other similarly graded houses. In order to determine if bathrooms or bedrooms were important, I created a graph to visualize the spread, however the graph did not help indicate one over the other. I individually modeled each feature to see which explains more of the data. It was determined that bathrooms are more important, as they explain aproximately 18% of our price data while bedrooms only explain approximately 8.2% of our price data.

Using this information as a guide, I created 3 models before validation. The first model removed any feature with a p-value above 0.05; while this model yielded the highest R-squared (0.615) it also yielded the highest skew (0.645) and kurtosis (3.938), in addition to indicating multicollinearity. For my second model I looked at variance inflation factors and removed features that had significantly higher VIFs. This model resulted in a decreased R-squared (0.457) as well as a decreased skew (0.446) and kurtosis (3.202), indicating that the model became more normal; multicollinearity is also no longer indicated. For model 3, I saw that most features had a p-value of 0.00, so I removed any features with p-values higher than 0.005. This model resulted in almost the exact same way; R-squared (0.456) went down by one-thousandth, as did skew (0.445), and kurtosis stayed the same. Although this model has an R-squared below 0.6, I've decided to use it as my final model because it has the highest R-squared with the least amount of features, as well as a fairly normal skew and kurtosis.

Model validation determined that this model is quite accurate in predicting housing prices based on selected features, with the testing and training data both resulting in R-squared around 0.456; meaning our final model can explain approximately 45.6% of our price data. Through model validation it was also determined that grade, floors, and bathrooms highly influence housing price. Grade, which we can think of as a house rating, has the biggest impact on price. When everything else is held constant, you can expect a price increase of about $112,000 per additional point. The number of floors in the home can vastly change the price as well; specifically between 2.0 and 2.5 floors. When everything is held constant, houses wit 2.5 floors cost about $95,000 more than houses with 2.0 floors. The number of bathrooms the home has can also affect the house price. When everything is held constant, for eacha dditional bathroom the house has you can expect a price increase of about $12,000.

Although I was able to answer my initial questions and determine which features have the highest impact on price, there is still more that could be done. Further exploration within this dataset could look at features other than grade and how they vary by location. Does the number of bathrooms or bedrooms change based on location? What about number of floors? Again, would this impact the house price? In addition, another thing that could be looked at is school districts/pipelines. If this information was included, how much would it impact the house prices and what would that look like? If you're looking to save on your new house, you already know that grade, floors, and bathrooms are your best bet for a price change. If you're looking to sell and want to increase your house price, I'd focus on your house grade and if you can make it higher without too much costly construction.
